##INKE Lightening Talk Paper: What 3D Printing Might Teach Us About Fabricating Truths
##David N. Wright, Douglas College
##May 8, 2015

This brief discussion paper confronts the following general question: if we are attempting to revive erased spaces by re-fabricating them, what responsibility do we have to the corpse's social, political, economic, and cultural aura? Put another way, how should we consider, integrate or confront an individual—or collective—emotional affect produced by the revival of the previously erased or inert? Focusing on 3D printing and its inter-related communities, I want to look at how the production of material objects by 3D printing mediates the transaction of cultural artifacts. Suffice to say, there is a considerable space for understanding the current rush to fabricate as encouraging unforeseen fractures in (and connections to) the exchange of cultural artifacts and the reception of their signification. 
##THE FILAMENT

The reproduction of erased spaces (loosely defined)—demolished buildings, destroyed geographic features, lost / stolen objects, artifactual objects—is infiltrated upon by the plasticity of their fabrication. By re-producing erased objects using materials sometimes not even present in the original contexts, our re-fabrication creates a distorted sense of materiality. Even when the materials are the same—the reproduction in the same material as the erased original—the individual or collective reaction to the fabricated materiality suggests a fracture or obtuse connection to the original, erased, object.  We often do not account for the fabrication of materiality as it is manifest through an individual or collective expectation. The filament that joins the 3D printed object to its community--both as cultural owners and as fabricators--is broken by consistent failures, errors or flaws in processing, and the rigidity of fabrication material choices. 

The fiction of a 3D printed object--and I'm just going to claim that object as text to get us through the mire--is that its materiality signifies the success of the end product, rather than the signification of the object itself; fabricating alone is often enough. Unlike the temporal reality of a novel, the fabricated object carries with it a different kind of cultural synthesis. It is at once "real" -- tangible, spatial, manipulatable -- and "unreal" -- fabricated, plastic, dyed. The object tends to signify the success of the fabrication itself, rather than the representation or symbolic effect of its re-making or its reintroduction into cultural exchange. It's as if the author were to suddenly declare, holding up something that looks like a novel: "Look, I made this book!" without ever addressing the content, its possible significance or its role as a potential cultural artifact. Add to this that, as with the novel, the 3D printed object is often separated from the politics of its making and the line that connects the object to its original cultural moment is thick with socio-cultural implications not addressed through the reproduction of the object itself. As we'll see in a moment, rendering prehistoric objects (as an erased space) in plastic infects that object with a fabrication infrastructure completely disconnected from any prehistoric significations its cultural capital might offer. Often amazed by the process of fabrication itself, we tend to avoid asking where the fabrication materials are coming from and how they might signify precisely the disenfranchised group that was once in possession of the original object. 

Taking this filament linking completed object to the politics of its revival into account then, it seems reasonable to suggest that 3D printing is fabricating--and I am using this term in the loaded sense, with all its definitional qualities--more than the object itself. What 3D printing does is fabricate--again, in the loaded meaning sense--new cultural cross-references in tactility of the object it revives, reproduces, or oddly, erases even further--making stone into plastic. 

##FIT TO SCALE 
While it is certainly possible to fabricate lost spaces at the original scale, it's not common practice. Often, our equipment does not allow for accurate scale or the cultural fragments we use to help re-make force us to guess at the size of the original. That said, the question of scale is particularly salient when we encounter large-scale reproductions. Take for example the reproduction of the square mile erased by the 9/11 attacks on New York City. While it would be awesome to recreate the buildings at scale, reminding everyone of Baudrilliard's  simulacrum, we need to play to the limits of our machinery. The recreation of lost surfaces such as these raises questions about socio-cultural resonance. 

For instance, does something produced in miniature possess a resonance congruent with the original, and does this matter? Our experiences with 3D printing suggest that not only does scale affect the interpretation of the fabricated object, sometimes rendering once-erased objects in miniature performs a reductive act upon the social, cultural, economic, political offence all over again; creating a second erasure that at once acknowledges the lie (or fabrication) of the 3D printed object's resonance, and ends up as a reductive commentary on the nuances of the original erasure. One gets a very clear sense of the problems raised by fabrication technologies when the objects to be reproduced become uncomfortable--a scaled model of the erased Chinatown in New Westminster, BC.  

At the same time, thinking about scale forces us to confront more serious questions about motivation. Enthused with the potentialities of the emerging technology, we often rush to "see if it'll print" or "scale to fit." When we fabricate things based on an incomplete sense of scale or reduce the scale of erased spaces to make them manageable, we necessarily set off another sequence of socio-political signifiers such as those raised by the plasticity of their fabrication. In short, we often discard the potential reductive effect of the space's very absence in favour of a defence that heralds its revival. Animating the very privilege that facilitates the fabrication itself, the Maker revives a host of emotional, cultural, social, political, even economic, signifiers that come with the revival of erased spaces. One must be careful not to render cultural spaces, the cultural production associated with those spaces, and the emotional reaction they might illicit, as a trinket. 

##THE TYRANNY OF ERROR

Largely determined outside the parameters of the 3D printer itself, scale and materiality are rendered moot by the tyranny of error brought on by the use of emerging technology. 

Material fabrication needs to account for the "permanence" of the physical object that, once produced, cannot accept changes or show the marginalia / evidence of its transformations, particularly given that most reconstitutions of erased spaces tend to look for sources in the margins of society—those neglected, highly isolated, prototypes—where few methods exist to mark cultural, economic, and aesthetic contexts. 

The 3D printed object has many layers that cannot be peeled back because they have melted seamlessly into one another, creating the perception of smoothness, refinement, and completion. However, the hardware--and its accessibility--used to scan, render, and finally fabricate erased spaces may represent a re-colonization rather than a renewed existence.

##THINGIVERSALITY - SOCIAL KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTION AS ERASURE

Thinking about the image of the Taiwan Aboriginal Harvest Alter house as it is juxtaposed with the on-screen interface of the software, urbanized, darkened, boxed. It's exclusionary to the core, respecting nothing of the cultural heritage significance of that which is about to be created. This crowd-sourcing of digital files for 3D printing is part of the perils of social knowledge creation that does not reflect or perhaps even take into account the heritage value or symbolic value of the object, or at least positions it on a lower scale than that of availability -- you can "find" it, but what exactly are you finding?  
Finally, the argument concludes with a discussion of what happens when the individual or collective reaction to the materiality of once-erased spaces intercedes upon the intended outcomes, rendering any knowledge creation or production inert. That is, while we may be able to fabricate erased objects—in this case using the case study wherein we tried to reproduce sections of the long razed New Westminster, B.C. Chinatown in a miniature—we do not yet have a foundation for understanding and predicting the triggers—cultural, social, economic—the reproduction of those models may elicit. We may be guilty, in our technological zeal for the socialization of knowledge, of "fabricating" connections between materiality and memory, unduly activating difficult emotional reactions that are not accounted for in the value proposition for re-making erased spaces, which is often about re-establishing erased truths and representing lost heritage. What the fabrication of erased spaces, as a form of technologically-based social knowledge creation, might show us is that these spaces are not artifacts in a tactile or material sense, but rather are symbolic of a set of emotional, cultural, and economic realities that individuals and collectives may not be equipped to process. As we fabricate, or re-fabricate, assemblages of once-erased cultural spaces, what exactly are we activating in the social space and how might we account for the “fixed” truth fabricated by the 3D printing machine? 


Thinking about Thingiverse as Social Knowledge Creation of a different sort: unchecked copying and disposessing of things. Cultural texts, if you like. Real things. Remaking and remoulding. 

Erasure - Drafting Notes

Where are the collaborators and who the fuck is this "Apple" that does all the desinging anyway? IS IT REALLY A PERSON....nope, it's metonomy. It's the representation of people, BUT, and this is what's important: it's the representation of machines. The machines are designing and the machines are assembling... so who the fuck is building? 
	
[Taiwan Aboriginal Harvest Alter](http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:217653) 
[Prehistoric Native American Headpot](http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:436637)




